we chapel at wake forest university in
winston-salem north carolina i'm jim
lehrer of the newshour on pbs welcome to
this second election 2000 debate between
the republican candidate for president
governor george w bush of texas and the
democratic candidate vice president al
gore these debates are sponsored by the
commission on presidential debates the
format and the rules are those
negotiated by representatives of the two
campaigns only the subjects tonight and
the questions are mine
the format tonight is that of a
conversation the only prevailing rule is
that no single response can ever ever
exceed two minutes the prevailing rule
for the audience here in the hall is as
always absolute quiet please
good evening governor bush as president
vice president gore the end of our 90
minutes last week in boston the total
time each of you took was virtually the
same as if we can do the same tonight or
come close governor bush the first
question goes to you one of you is about
to be elected the leader of the single
most powerful nation in the world
economically financially militarily
diplomatically you name it have you
formed any guiding principles for
exercising this enormous power i have i
have first question is what's in the
best interest of the united states
what's in the best interests of our
people when it comes to foreign policy
that'll be my guiding question is it in
our nation's interests peace in the
middle east is in our nation's interests
having a hemisphere that is free for
trade and peaceful is in our nation's
interests strong relations in the europe
is in our nation's interest i've thought
a lot about what it means to be the
president i also understands that an
administration is not one person but an
administration is dedicated citizens who
are called by the
president to serve the country to serve
a cause greater themself and so i've
thought about an administration of
people who represent all america but
people who understand my compassionate
conservative philosophy i ever started
naming names except for one person and
that's mr richard cheney who i thought
did a great job the other night he's a
vice presidential nominee who represents
who i think people got to see why i
picked him he's a man of solid judgment
and he's going to be a person to stand
by my side one of the things i've done
in texas is i've been able to put
together a good team of people i've been
able to set clear goals the goals ought
to be an education system that leaves no
child behind medicare for our seniors a
social security system that's safe and
secure foreign policy that's in our
nation's interest in a strong military
and then bring people together to
achieve those goals that's what a chief
executive officer does i've thought long
and hard about the honor and being the
president of the united states
vice president gore yes jim i thought a
lot about that particular question and i
see our greatest natural national
strength coming from what we stand for
in the world i see it as a question of
values it is a great tribute to our
founders that 224 years later this
nation is now looked to by the peoples
on every other
konna and the peoples from every part of
this earth as a kind of model for for
what their future could be and i don't
think that's just a the kind of
exaggeration that we take pride in as
americans it's really true even the ones
that sometimes shake their fist at us as
soon as they have a change that allows
the people to speak freely they're
wanting to develop some kind of
blueprint that will help them be like us
more freedom free markets political
freedom so i think first and foremost
our power ought to be wielded to in ways
that form
more perfect union the power of example
is america's greatest power in the world
and that means for example standing up
for human rights
it means addressing the problems of
injustice and inequity along lines of
race and ethnicity here at home because
in all these other places around the
world where they're having these
terrible problems when they feel hope it
is often because they see in us a
reflection of their potential so we've
got to enforce our civil rights laws
we've got to deal with things like
racial profiling and we have to keep our
military strong we have the strongest
military and i'll do whatever is
necessary if i'm president to make sure
that it stays that way but our real
power comes i think from our values
should the people of the world look at
the united states governor and say
should they fear us should they welcome
our involvement so they see us as a
friend everybody in the world how do you
how would you project us around the
world as president well i think they all
look at us as a as a country that
understands freedom or doesn't matter
who you are or how you're raised or
where you're from that you can succeed i
don't think they look at us with envy it
really depends upon how the our nation
conducts itself in foreign policy if
we're an arrogant nation they'll they'll
resent us if we're a humble nation but
strong they'll welcome us and our nation
is stands stands alone right now in the
world in terms of power and that's why
we've got to be humble and and yet
projects strength in a in a way that
promotes freedom seidel i don't think
that'll look at us in any way other than
what we are we're a freedom-loving
nation and if we're an arrogant nation
they'll view us that way but if we're a
humble nation they'll respect us humble
nation i agree with that i agree with
that i think that one of the problems
that we have faced in the world is that
we are so much more powerful than any
single nation has been in relationship
to the rest of the world then at anytime
in history that i know about anyway that
there is some resentment of us power so
i think that the the idea of humility is
is an important one but i think that we
also have to have a sense of mission in
the world and what we have to protect
our capacity to to push forward what
america is all about
that means not only military strength
and our values
it also means keeping our economy strong
you know in the last two decades ago it
was routine for leaders of foreign
countries to come over here and say you
guys have got to do something about
these horrendous deficits because it's
causing tremendous problems for the rest
of the world and we were lectured to all
the time the fact that we have the
strongest economy in history today is
not good enough we need to do more but
the fact that it is so strong enables us
to project the power for good that
american can represent does that give us
does our wealth our good economy our
power bring with it special obligations
to the rest of the world yes it does
take for example third-world debt i
think i think we ought to be getting
forgiving third-world debt under certain
conditions i think for example if we're
convinced that a third-world country
that's got a lot of debt would would
reform itself that the money wouldn't go
into the hands of a few but would go to
help people and i think it makes sense
for us to use our wealth in that way
already trade debt for for valuable rain
forest lands makes that much sense yes
sir we do have an obligation well but we
can't be all things to all people we can
help build coalitions but we can't put
our troops all around the world we can
lend money but we've got to do it wisely
we shouldn't be lending money to too
corrupt officials so we got to be
guarded in our generosity well let's go
through some of the specifics now a new
vice president gore the governor
mentioned the middle east here we're
talking at this stage of the game about
diplomatic power that we have what do
you think the united states should do no
we should do right now to resolve that
conflict over there
the first priority has to be on ending
the violence dampening down the tensions
that have risen there we need to to a
call upon syria to release the three
israeli soldiers who have been captured
we need to insist a arafat send out
instructions to halt some of the
provocative acts of violence that have
been going on i think that we also have
to keep a weather eye toward to saddam
hussein because he's taking advantage of
this situation to once again make make
threats and he needs to understand that
he's not only dealing with israel he he
is dealing he's dealing with us if he if
he is making the kind of threats that
he's talking about there the the use of
diplomacy in this situation has already
well it goes hour by hour and day by day
now it's a very tense situation there
but in the last 24 hours there has been
some subsided of the violence there it's
too much to hope that this is going to
continue but i do hope that it will
continue our country has been very
active with regular conversations with
the the leaders there and we just have
to take it day to day right now but one
thing i would say where diplomacy is
concerned israel should should feel
absolutely secure about one thing our
bonds with israel are larger than
agreements our disagreements on some
details of diplomatic initiatives they
are historic they are strong and they
are enduring and our ability to serve as
an honest broker
is about is something that we need to
shepherd governor well i think during
the campaign particularly now during
this difficult period we ought to be
speaking with one voice and i appreciate
the way the administration has worked
hard to calm the tensions like the vice
president i call him chairman arafat
have his people pull back to make the
piece i think credibility is going to be
very important in the future in the
middle east i want everybody to know
should i be the president israel's going
to be our friend i'm gonna stand by
israel secondly that i think it's
important to reach out to moderate arab
nations like jordan in egypt saudi
arabia and kuwait it's important to be
friends with people when you don't eat
each other so that when you do there's a
strong bond of friendship and that's
going to be particularly important in
dealing not only with situations such as
now occurring in israel but with saddam
hussein the coalition against saddam has
fallen apart or unraveling is put it
that way the sanctions are being are
being violated there's we don't know
whether he's developing weapons of mass
destruction he better not be or there's
going to be a consequence should i be
the president but it's important to have
credibility and credibility is formed by
being strong with your friends and
resolute in your determination it's one
of the reasons why i think it's
important for this nation to develop an
anti-ballistic missile system that we
can share with our allies in the middle
east if need be to keep the peace to be
able to say to the saddam hussain's of
the world or the iranians don't dare
threaten our friends it's also important
to keep a strong ties in the middle east
with credible ties because of the energy
crisis we're now in it after all how the
energy is produced from from the middle
east and so i appreciate what the
administration is doing it i hopefully
get a sense of should i be forced enough
to be the president of how my
administration will react to the middle
east so you don't believe vice president
gore that we should take sides in this
resolve this right now a lot of people
pushing hey we the united states should
declare itself and and not be so neutral
in this particular
with we stand with israel but we have
maintained the ability to serve as an
honest broker and one of the reasons
that's important is that israel cannot
have direct dialogue with some of the
people on the other side of conflicts
especially during times of tension
unless that dialogue comes through us
and if we throw away that ability to
serve as an honest broker then we have
thrown that we will have thrown away a
strategic asset that's important not
only to us but also to israel you agree
with that government i do i do think
this though i think that when it comes
to timetables it can't be a united
states timetable as to how the is to how
discussions take place there's got to be
a timetable that all parties can agree
to other than you know dr
palestinian-israeli secondly any lasting
peace is going to have to be a peace
that's good for both sides and therefore
the term honest broker makes sense
whether that the current administration
has worked hard to keep the parties at
the table that's i will try to do the
same thing but it won't be on my
timetable it'll be on the timetable that
people are comfortable with in the
middle east people watching here tonight
very interested in middle east policy
and they're so interested that they want
to make them they want to base their
vote on differences between the two of
you as president how you would handle
middle east policy is there any
difference i haven't heard a big
difference right in the last few
exchanges well i think i know it's hard
to tell i think that you know i would
hope to be able to convince people i
could handle the iraqi situation better
i mean we don't sit down to say anything
yes and i could get him out of there
i'd like to of course and i presume this
administration would as well but we
don't know there's no inspectors now in
iraq the coalition that was in place
isn't as strong as it used to be he is
it he is a danger we don't want him
fishing in troubled waters in the middle
east and it's going to be hard to it's
going to be important to rebuild that
coalition to keep the pressure on him
you feel that as a failure of the
clinton administration
i do love well when i when i got to be a
part of the current administration it
was right after i was one of the few
members of my political party to support
a former president bush in the persian
gulf war resolution i and at the end of
that war for whatever reasons it was not
finished in a way that removed saddam
hussein from power i know there are all
kinds of circumstances and explanations
but the fact is that that's the
situation that that was left when i when
i got there all right and we have
maintained the sanctions now i want to
go further i want to give robust support
to the groups that are trying to
overthrow saddam hussein and i know
their allegations that they're too weak
to do it but that's what they said about
the forces that were opposing milosevic
in in serbian and you know the the
policy of enforcing sanctions against
serbia has just resulted in a
spectacular victory for democracy just
in the past week and it seems to me that
having taken so long to see the
sanctions work they're building upon the
policy of containment that was
successful over a much longer period of
time against the former soviet union in
the communist bloc seems a little early
to to to declare that we should give up
on the on the sanctions i know the
governor's not necessarily saying that
but you know all of these flights that
have come in all of them have been in
accordance with the sanctions regime i'm
told except for three where they
notified and they're trying to break out
of the box there's no question about it
i don't think they should be allowed to
are you did he correct you did he state
your position correctly you're not
calling for eliminating the sanctions
are you no of course
absolutely not i wanted to be tougher
let's go i went to milosevic and and
yugoslavia and it falls into the area of
our military power governor new question
should the fall of milosevic be seen as
a triumph for us military intervention i
think it's a triumph i thought that the
president made the right decision in in
joining nato and bombing serbia i
supported him when they did so i called
upon the congress not to hamstring the
administration and in terms of forcing
troop withdrawals on a timetable it
wasn't in necessarily our best interests
or fit our nation strategy and so i
think it's good public policy i think it
worked and and i'm pleased i took this
made a decision i made i'm pleased the
president made the decision he made
because freedom took hold in that part
of the world and there's a lot work left
to be done however but did you think it
would not have happened do you believe
do you think that milosevic would not
have fallen if the united states and
nato had not intervened militarily is
this a legitimate use of our military
yes i think it is absolutely i don't
think he would have fallen had we not
using force and i know there's some in
my party that disagreed with that
sentiment but i supported the president
i thought he made the right decision to
do so i didn't think he necessarily made
the right decision to take land troops
off the table right before we committed
ourselves offensively but nevertheless
it worked the administration deserves
credit for having made it work it is
important for nato to have it work it's
important for nato to be strong and
confident to help keep the peace in
europe and one of the reasons i felt so
strongly that the united states needed
to participate was because of our
relations with nato and nato is going to
be an important part of keeping the
peace in the future now there's more
work to do what remains to be seen how
whether or not there's going to be a
political settlement to kosovo and i
certainly hope there is one i've also on
record as saying at some point time i
hope our european friends become the
peacekeepers in bosnia and the balkans i
hope that they put the troops on the
so that we can withdraw our troops and
focus our military on fighting and
winning war well i i've been kind of a
hardliner on this issue for more than
eight years when i was in the senate
before i became vice president i was
pushing for stronger action against
milosevic he caused the deaths of so
many people
he was the last communist party boss
there and then he became a dictator that
by some other label he was still
essentially a communist dictator and
unfortunately now he is trying to
reassert himself in a serbian politics
already just today the members of his
political party said that they were
going to ignore the orders of the new
president of serbia and that could they
question his legitimacy and he's still
gonna try to be actively involved he is
an indicted war criminal he should be
held accountable now i did want to pick
up on one of the the statements earlier
and maybe i have heard maybe i've heard
the previous statements wrong governor
in some of the discussions we've had
about when it's appropriate for the u.s
to use force around the world at times
the the standards that you've laid down
have given me the impression that if
it's if it's something like a genocide
taking place or what they called ethnic
cleansing in in bosnia that that alone
would not be that that wouldn't be the
kind of situation that would cause you
to think that the u.s ought to to get
involved with with troops now have to be
other factors involved for me to want to
be involved but by itself that to me can
bring into play a fundamental american
strategic interest because i think it's
based on our values and now if i got
that wrong all right okay yeah i'm
trying to figure out who the questioner
if i think it's in our nation's
strategic interest i'll commit troops i
thought it was in our strategic
interests to keep milosevic in check
because of our relations in nato and
that's why i took the position i took i
think it's important for nato to be
strong and confident i felt like an
unchecked milosevic would would harm
nato and so it depends on the situation
mr vice president
well let's get us down to study for a
moment new question related to this
there been i figured this out in the
last 20 years there have been eight
major actions involved the introduction
of us ground air or naval forces let me
name lebanon grenada panama the persian
gulf samaya bosnia haiti kosovo if you
had been president or any of those
interventions would any of those
interventions not have happened can you
run through the list again
sure lebanon i thought that was a
grenada i supported that panama i
supported that persian gulf yes i voted
for it supported somalian well of course
and that that again no i i think that
that was ill-considered i did support it
at the time it was in the previous
administration in the bush-quayle
administration and i think in retrospect
the lessons there are ones that we that
we should take take very very seriously
bosnia oh yes haiti yes
and then kosovo what you asked about
that want me to do it with you no you
want to go be lebanon make make a custom
absolutely sure somalia start off as a
humanitarian mission and then changed
into a nation-building mission and
that's where the mission went wrong the
mission was changed and as a result our
nation paid a price and so i don't think
our troops ought to be used for what's
called a nation-building
i think our troops ought to be used to
fighting wind war i think our troops
ought to be used to to help overthrow to
a dictator that's in our innocent when
it's in our best interests but in this
case it was a nation-building exercise
and same with haiti i wouldn't have
supported either what about lebanon yes
grenada yes panama yes
obviously the some of them i got a
conflict of interest on you know what i
mean the persian gulf obviously yeah and
bosnia and you've already talked about
about kosovo but the reverse side of the
question governor that vice president
gore mentioned for instance 600,000
people died in rwanda in 1994 there was
no us intervention of only intervention
from the outside world was that a
mistake not to intervene i think the
administration did the right thing in
that case i do it was a horrible
situation no one liked to see it on our
you know on our tv screens but it's a
case where we need to make sure we've
got a you know kind of a early warning
system in place in places where there
could be a ethnic cleansing and genocide
the way we saw it there in rwanda and
that's a case where we need to you know
use our influence to have countries in
africa come together and help deal with
the situation the administration missing
blair having a great love fest night but
the administration made the right
decision on training nigerian troops for
situations just such as this in rwanda
and and so i thought they made the right
decision not to send the us troops into
rwanda do you have any second thoughts
on that based on what you said a moment
ago about genocide and i'd like to come
back to the to the question of
nation-building but let me address
directly first fine we did actually send
troops into rwanda to help with the
humanitarian relief measures my wife
tipper who who's here actually went on a
military plane with general shali
cacilie on one of those the flights but
i think in retrospect we were too late
getting in there we could have saved
more lives if we had acted earlier but i
do not think that it was an example
a conflict where we should have put our
troops in to try to separate the the
parties for this reason jim one of my
one of the criteria that i think is
important in deciding when and if we
should ever get involved around the
world is whether or not with our
national security interest is involved
if we can really make the difference
with military force if we've tried
everything else if we have allies in the
balkans we had allies nato ready willing
and able to go and carry a big part of
the burden in africa we did not now we
have tried our countries tried to create
an africa crisis response team there and
we've met some resistance we have had
some luck with nigeria but in sierra
leone and and that now that nigeria has
become a democracy we hope it stays that
way then then maybe we can build on that
but because we had no allies and because
it was very unclear that we could
actually accomplish what we would want
to accomplish about putting military
forces there i think it was the right
thing not to jump in as heartbreaking as
it was but i think we should have come
in much quicker with the humanitarian
mission so what would you say governor
somebody would say hey wait a minute
why not africa i mean why why the middle
east why the balkans but not africa when
600,000 people's lives are at risk i
understand and and africa is important
and we've got a lot of work in africa to
promote democracy and trade and there's
some vice president mentioned nigeria is
a fledgling democracy we got to work
with nigeria it's an important continent
but there's got to be priorities and
middle east is a priority for a lot of
reasons as is europe and the far east on
our own hemisphere and those are my four
top priority should i be the president
not to say we won't be engaged nor
trying to ignore should we work hard to
get other nations to come together to
prevent atrocity i thought the best
example of a way to handle a situation
is east timor when we
logistical support to the australians
support that that only we can provide i
thought that was a good model but we
can't be all things to all people in the
world jim and i think that's where maybe
the vice-president ice began to have
some differences i am i'm worried about
over committing our military around the
world i want to be judicious in his use
you mentioned haiti i wouldn't have sent
troops to haiti i didn't think it was a
mission worthwhile as a nation-building
mission and it was not very successful
it cost us billions a couple of billions
of dollars and i'm not so sure democracy
is any better off in haiti than it was
marcin gortat you agree with the with
the governor's views on nation-building
the use of military our military to for
nation-building as he described it than
to find it i don't think we agree on
i would certainly also be judicious in
evaluating any potential use of american
troops overseas i think we have to be
very reticent about that but look jim
the world is changing us so rapidly the
way i see it the world's getting much
closer together like it or not we are
now the the united states is now the
natural leader of the world all these
other countries are looking to us now
just because we cannot be involved
everywhere and shouldn't be doesn't mean
that we should shy away from going in in
anywhere now both of us are kind of i
guess stating the others position in a
in a maximalist extreme way but but i
think there is a difference here this
idea of nation-building is the kind of a
pejorative phrase but think about the
great conflict of the the past century
world war two during the the years
between world war one and world war two
a great lesson was learned by our
military leaders and the people of the
united states the lesson was that in the
aftermath of world war one we kind of
turned our backs and left them to their
own devices and they brewed up a lot of
trouble that quickly became world war
two and acting upon that lesson in the
aftermath of our great victory in world
we laid down the marshall plan
president truman did how we got
intimately involved in building nato and
other structures there we we still have
lots of troops in europe and what did
what did we do in the in the late 40s
and 50s and 60s we were nation building
and it was economic but it was also
military and the confidence that those
countries recovering from the wounds of
war had by having troops there we had we
had a civil administrators come in to
set up their their their ways of
building their towns back base you said
in the boston debate governor on this
issue of native nation-building that the
united states military is overextended
now where is it overextended where are
their us military that you would bring
home if you become president well first
let me just say one comment about what
the vice president said i think one of
the lessons in between world war one and
world war two is we let our military
atrophy and we can't do that we've got
to rebuild our military but one of the
problems we have in the military is
we're in a lot of places around the
world and i mentioned one and that's the
balkans i'd very much like to get our
troops out of there i recognize we can't
do it now nor do i advocate an immediate
withdrawal i mean that would be a
abrogation of our agreement with nato no
one is suggesting that but i think it
ought to be one of our priorities to
work with our european friends to
convince them to put troops on the
ground and there is an example haiti is
another example and now there are some
places where i think you know i
supported the administration in colombia
i think it's important for us to be
training colombians in that part of the
world our hemispheres and our interests
to have to have a peaceful colombia but
it's got you know the use of the
military there's some people are now
suggesting that if you don't want to use
the military to maintain the peace to do
the civil thing is a time to consider a
civil force of some kind it comes in
after the military that builds nations
all of that is that that on your i don't
think so i don't screen i think what we
need to do is convince people who live
in the lands they live in to build the
nation's maybe i'm missing something
here i mean we're gonna have kind of a
nation-building core from america
absolutely not our military is meant to
fight and win war that's what it's meant
to do and when it gets overextended
morale drops and i'm not an assistant i
strongly believe we need to have a
military presence in the korea peninsula
not only to keep the benissa on the
peace of the peninsula but it to keep
regional stability and i strongly
believe we need to keep a presence in
nato but i'm gonna be judicious as to
how to use the military it needs to be
in our vital interest the mission needs
to be clear and the extra strategy
obvious i don't disagree with that i
certainly don't disagree that we ought
to get our troops home from places like
the balkans as as soon as we can as soon
as the mission is complete that's what
we did in haiti there there are no more
than a handful of american military
personnel and in haiti
now and haitians have their problems but
we gave them a chance to restore
democracy and that's really about all we
can do but if you have a situation like
that right in our backyard with chaos
about to break out and flotillas forming
to to come across the water and all
kinds of violence they're right in one
of our neighboring countries there then
and then i think that we did the right
thing there and as for this idea of
nation-building the phrase sounds
grandiose and you know we can't be we
can't allow ourselves to get
overextended i certainly agree with that
and that's why i've supported building
building up our capacity i've devoted in
the budget i've proposed as i said last
week more than twice as much as the
governor has proposed i think that it's
in better shape now than he generally
does we've had some disagreements about
that he said that if two divisions would
have to report not ready for for duty
that's not what the the joint chiefs say
but there's no doubt that we have to
continue building up readiness and
military strength and we have to also be
very cautious in the way we use our
military in the non-military area of
influencing events around the world the
financial economic area world bank
president wolfensohn said recently
governor that us contributions to
overseas development assistance is lower
now almost than it has ever been is that
a problem for you do you think what is
your what is your idea about what the
united states obligations are i'm
talking about financial assistance and i
sort of think other countries the poor
countries well i mentioned turbo debt
that's that's the best where we can use
our generosity to influence in a
positive way influence nations i believe
we ought to have foreign aid but i don't
think we ought to just have foreign aid
for the sake of foreign aid i think
foreign aid needs to be used to
encourage markets and reform i think a
lot of times we just spend a to say we
feel better about it ends up being spent
the wrong way and there's some pretty
egregious examples recently one being
russia where we had imf loans that ended
up in the pockets of a lot of powerful
people and didn't help them help the
nation i think the imf has got a role in
the world but i don't want to see the
imf out there as a way to say that world
bankers if you make a bad loan will bail
you out it needs to be available for
emergency situations i thought the
president did the right thing on it with
mexico and it was very strongly
supportive of the administration in
mexico but i don't think the imf and our
ought to be ought to be a stoploss for
people who ought to be able to evaluate
risk themselves and so i look at every
place where we're investing money i just
want to make sure the return is good do
you think we're meeting our obligations
properly no no i would make some changes
i think there need to be reforms that in
the imf i've generally supported it but
i've seen them make some calls that i
thought were highly questionable and i
think that there's a general agreement
in in many parts of the world now that
there ought to be changes in the eye
the world bank i think is generally
doing a better job but i think one of
the big issues here that doesn't get
nearly enough attention is the issue of
corruption the governor mentioned it
earlier i've worked on this issue it's
an enormous problem and corruption and
official agencies like militaries and
police departments around the world
customs officials that's one of the
worst forms of it and we have got to
again lead by example and help these
other countries that are trying to
straighten out their situations to find
the tools and in order to do it
i just think jim that this is an
absolutely unique period in world
history where the world's coming
together as i said they're looking to us
and we have a fundamental choice to make
are we going to step up to the plate as
a nation the way we did after world war
two the way that generation of heroes
said okay the united states is going to
is going to be the leader and the world
benefited tremendously from the courage
that they showed in those post-war years
i think that in the the aftermath of the
cold war it's time for us to do
something very similar to step up to the
plate to provide the leadership
leadership on the environment leadership
to make sure the world economy keeps
moving in the right direction again that
means not running big deficits here and
not squandering our surplus it means
having intelligent decisions that keep
our prosperity going and key and
shepherds that economic strength so that
we can provide that leadership role let
me come from that yeah i'm not so sure
the role of the united states is to go
around the world say this is the way
it's got to be we can help and maybe
it's just our difference in government
the way we view government i mean i want
to empower people i don't you know i
want to help people help themselves not
have government tell people what to do i
just don't think it's the role of the
united states to walk into a country say
we do it this way so should you i think
we can help i know we got to encourage
democracy in the marketplaces but take
russia for example we went into russia
we said here's some i am
money and ended up in victory ramirez
pocket and others and and yet we played
like there was reform the only people
are gonna reform russia or russia
they're gonna have to make the decision
themselves mr putin is going to have to
make the decision as to whether or not
he wants to adhere to rural law and
normal accounting practices so that if
countries and/or into entities invest
capital there's a reasonable rate of
return a way to get to money out of the
out of the economy but russia has to
make the decision we can we can work
with them on security matters for
example but it's their call to make so
i'm not exactly sure where the vice
president is coming from but i think one
way for us to end up being viewed as the
ugly american is for us to go around the
world saying we do it this way so should
you now we trust we trust freedom we
know freedom is a powerful powerful
powerful force much bigger than the
united states of america as we saw and
recently in the balkans but maybe i
misunderstand where you're coming from
mr vice president but iii think the
united states must be humble and must be
proud and confident of our values but
humble in how we treat nations that are
figuring out how to chart their own
course let's let's move on alright no
let's move on
far be it for me to suggest otherwise
first first a couple of follow-ups from
the vice presidential debate last week
vice president gore would you support
our sign as president of federal law
banning racial profiling by police and
other authorities at all levels of
government yes i would the the only
thing an executive order can accomplish
is to ban it in federal law enforcement
agencies but i would also support a law
in in the congress that would have the
effect of doing the same thing i just i
think the racial profiling is a serious
problem i remember when the stories
first came out about the the stops in
new jersey by the highway patrol there
and i know it's been going on a long
time in some ways this is just a new
label for something that's been going
for years but it but i have to confess
that it was the first time that i really
focused on it in a new way and i was i
was surprised at the extent of it and i
think we've now got so many examples
around the country that we really have
to find ways to end this but imagine
what it what it is like for someone to
be singled out unfairly unjustly and
feel of the the unfair force of law
simply because of race or or ethnicity
now that runs counter to what the united
states of america is is all about at our
core and it's not an easy problem to
solve but i if i am entrusted with the
presidency it will be the first civil
rights act of the 21st century yeah i
can't imagine what it'd be like to be
singled out because of race and stopped
and harassed that's just flat wrong and
that's not what america is all about and
so we ought to do everything we can to
end racial profiling one of my concerns
though is i don't want to federalize the
local police forces
i want to obviously in the egregious
cases we need to enforce civil rights
law but we need to make sure that
internal affairs divisions at the local
level do their job and be given a chance
to do their job i believe in local
control of governments and obviously if
they don't there needs to be a
consequence at the federal level but
it's very important that we not overstep
our bounds and i think most people most
police officers are good dedicated
honorable citizens who are doing their
job putting their lives at risk who
aren't bigoted or aren't prejudiced i
don't think they ought to be held guilty
but i do think we need to find out where
racial profiling occurs and do something
about it and say to the local folks get
it done and if you can't there will be a
federal consequence and that could be a
federal law yeah and you would agree i
would agree and i also agree that most
police officers of course are doing a
good job and
i hate this practice also i talked to an
african-american police officer in
springfield massachusetts not not long
ago who raised this question and said
that in his opinion one of the biggest
solutions is in the training and not
only the training in police procedures
but human human relations and i think
that racial profiling is part of a
larger issue of how we deal with race in
america and as for singling people out
because of race you know james byrd was
singled out because of his race in texas
and other americans have been singled
out because of their race or or
ethnicity and that's why i think that we
can embody our values by passing a hate
crimes law
i think these crimes are different i
think they're different because they're
based on prejudice and hatred which is
which gives rise to crimes that have not
just a single victim but they're
intended to just ignite eyes and
dehumanize a whole group of people you
have a different view of that no i don't
really own hate crimes laws no i we got
one in texas and guess what the three
men who murdered james byrd guess what's
gonna happen to him they're gonna be put
to death a jury found him guilty and
it's gonna be hard to punish him any
worse after they get put to death and
it's the right cost so it's the right
decision now secondly there is other
forms of racial profiling that goes on
in america arab americans are racially
profiled in what's called secret
evidence people are stopped and we got
to do something about that my friend
senator spencer abraham of michigan is
pushing a law to make sure that no arab
americans are treated with respect
so racial profiling isn't just an issue
at the local police forces it's an issue
throughout our society and as we've
become a diverse society we're gonna
have to deal with it more and more i
just i believe though i believe sure as
i'm sitting here that most americans
really care they're tolerant people
they're good taller people it's the very
few that create most of the crises and
we just haven't have to find them and
deal with them what if you become
are there other areas racial problem
areas that you would deal with this
president evolving discrimination
assurance at arab americans but also
hispanics asians as well as blacks in
the sky let me tell you where the
biggest discrimination comes in public
education when we just move children
through the schools my friend phyllis
hunter is here
she had one of the greatest lines of all
lines she said reading is the new civil
right she's right and and and to make
sure our society is as hopeful as it
possibly can be every single child in
america must be educated i mean every
it starts with making sure every child
learns to read k through 2 diagnostic
testing so we know whether or not
there's a deficiency curriculum that
works and phonics needs to be an
integral part of our reading curriculum
intensity of reading laboratories
teacher retraining i mean there needs to
be a wholesale effort against racial
profiling which is they're literate
children we can do better in our public
schools we can we can close an
achievement gap and it starts with
making sure we have strong
accountability jim one of the
cornerstones of reform and good reform
is to measure because when you measure
you can ask the question do they know is
anybody being profiled as anybody being
discriminated against it becomes a tool
a corrective tool and i believe the
federal government must say that if you
receive any money any money from the
federal government for disadvantaged
children for example you must show us
whether or not the children are learning
and if they are fine and if they're not
there has to be a consequence and so to
make sure we end up with getting rid of
a basic structural prejudice education
there's nothing more prejudiced than not
educating a child
as president gore would be on your
racial discrimination elimination list
as president well i think we need tough
enforcement of the civil rights laws i
think we still need affirmative action i
would pass a hate crimes law as i said
and i guess i had misunderstood the
governor's a previous position the
family may have a misunderstanding of it
in texas also but i'd like to shift if i
could to the case the misunderstanding
let's clear this well i had thought that
there was a controversy at the end of
the legislative session where the hate
crimes law in texas was failed and that
the bird family among others asked you
to support it to governor and it died in
committee for lack of support am i wrong
about that well you don't realize we
have a hate crimes statute i'm talking
about the one that was proposed on the
deal well what the vice president must
not understand is we got hate crimes
bill in texas and secondly the people
that murdered mr bird got the ultimate
punishment but they were they were death
penalty they were prosecuted under
murder laws were they not well texas oh
oh oh in this case when you murder
somebody it's hate jim hell the dime is
hate and they got and they got the
ultimate punishment i'm not exactly sure
how you enhance the penalty any more
than the death penalty but we happen to
have a statue on the books that's a hate
crime statute in texas
may i respond sure i don't want to jump
i may have been misled by all the the
news reports about this matter because
the law that was proposed in texas that
has the support of the the bird family
and a whole lot of people in texas did
in fact die in committee there there may
be some other statute that was already
on the books but certainly the advocates
of the hate crimes law felt that a tough
new law was needed and it's important
jim not only not just not just because
of texas but because this mirrors the
national controversy there is pending
now in the congress a national hate
crimes law because of james byrd because
of matthew shepard who was crucified on
a split rail fence by biggest because of
others and and that law has has died in
committee also because of the same kind
of opposition and you would support that
absolutely would you support a national
hate crimes well i would support the or
enhanced version of it not to senator
kennedy versa but let me say to you mr
vice president we're happy with our laws
in our books that build it there was
another bill that did die in committee
but i want to repeat if you have a state
that fully supports the law like we do
in texas we're gonna go after all crime
and we're gonna make sure people get
punished for the crime and in this case
we can't and we can't enhance the
penalty any more than putting those
three thugs to death and that's what's
going to happen in the state of texas
new subject to question another vice
presidential debate follow-up governor
both senator lieberman and secretary
cheney said they were sympathetically
rethinking their views on same-sex
relationships what's your position on
that i'm not for gay marriage i think
marriage is a sacred institution between
a man and a woman and i appreciated the
way the administration signed the
defense of marriage act i presumed the
vice president supported when the
president signed that bill supports it
now but i think i think marriage is a
sacred institution that's i'm gonna be
respectful for people who may disagree
with me i've had a record of doing so in
the state of texas i've been a been a
person that would been called a uniter
not a divider because i accepted some i
accept other people's
points of view but i feel strongly that
that marriage should be between a man
and woman as president i agree with that
and i did support that law but i think
that we should find a way to allow some
kind of civic unions and i basically
agree with dick cheney and joe lieberman
and i think the three of us have one
view and the governor has another view
so right i'm not sure what kind of uses
scribing to make and just tell you i'm a
person who respects other people i
respect their respect when he says he
agrees with me then he says he doesn't
i'm not sure where he's coming from but
i will be a tolerant person i've been a
tolerant person all my life i just
happen to believe strongly that marriage
is between a man and a woman do you
believe in general terms that gays and
lesbians should have the same rights as
other americans yes i don't think they
don't have special rights but i think
they'll have the same rights well
there's a there's a law pending called
the employment non-discrimination act i
strongly support it what it says is that
gays and lesbians can't be fired from
their job because they're gay or lesbian
and and it would be a federal law
preventing that i wonder if the it's
been blocked by the opponents in the
majority in the congress i wonder if the
governor would lend his support to that
law governance is a good question in
coming around well but it's illogical
well i have no idea me can throw out all
kinds i don't know the particulars of
this law i will tell you i'm the kind of
person i don't hire fire somebody based
upon their sexual orientation as a
matter of fact i'd like to take the
issue a little further i don't really
think it's any of my you know any of my
concerns what how you conduct your sex
life and i think that's a private matter
and i think that's the way it ought to
be but i'm gonna be respectful for
people i'll tolerate people and i
support equal rights but not special
rights for people and special rights how
does that affect gays and lesbian
whether it be if they're given if
they're given for special protected
status and that doesn't mean we
shouldn't fully enforce laws and fully
protect people and fully honor people
which i will do is the president of the
united states their subjective question
egor how do you see the connection
between controlling gun sales in this
country and the incidence of death by
accidental or intentional piece of guns
jim i hope that we can come back to the
subject of education because the
governor made an extensive statement on
it and i have a very different view than
the one he than the one he expressed but
that having been said i believe that
well first of all let me say that the
governor and i agree on some things
where this subject is concerned i will
not do anything to affect the rights of
hunters or sportsmen i think that
homeowners have to be respected and
their right to have a gun if they wish
to the problem i see is that there are
too many guns getting into the hands of
children and criminals and people who
for whatever reason some kind of history
of stalking or domestic abuse really
should not be able to get guns
i think these assault weapons are a
so i favor closing the gun show loophole
in fact i cast the tie-breaking vote to
close it but then the majority in the
house of representatives went the other
way that's still pending if we could get
agreement on that maybe they could pass
that in the final days of this congress
i think we ought to restore the
three-day waiting period under the under
the brady law i think we should toughen
the enforcement of gun laws so that the
ones that are already on the books can
be enforced much more effectively as
some of the restrictions that have been
placed by the congress in in the last
couple of years i think in the last few
years i think have been unfortunate i
think that we ought to make all schools
gun-free have a gun-free zone around
every school in this country i think
that measures like these are important
child safety trigger locks on a
mandatory basis and others
govenor well starts with enforcing law
we need to say loud and clear to
somebody if you're going to carry a gun
illegally we're gonna arrest you if
you're gonna sell a gun illegally you
need to be arrested if you commit a
crime with a gun there needs to be
absolute certainty in the law and and
that means that the local local law
enforcement officials need help at the
federal level the programs like project
exile where the federal government
intensifies arresting people illegally
use guns and we haven't done a very good
job of that the federal level recently
and i'm going to make it a priority
secondly i don't think we ought to be
selling guns to people who shouldn't
have them
that's why i support instant background
checks at at gun shows one of the
reasons we have an instant background
check is so that we instantly know
whether or not somebody should have a
gun or not in texas i try to do
something innovative believe what you
said you know there's a lot to talk
you know trigger locks being on guns
sold in the future i support that but i
said listen if you if you want to
trigger lock to make your gun safe come
to come and get one for free and so
we're distributing in our state of texas
for free i think we ought to raise the
age at which a juvenile can carry a
handgun from 18 to 21 i disagree with
the vice president on this issue i don't
eat leaves for registration of guns i
think the only people are gonna show up
to register or get a licensing i guess
licensing like a driver's license of a
gun the only people are going to show up
or and law abiding citizens the criminal
is not going to show up and say hey give
me my id card
it's the law-abiding citizens will do
that and i i just i don't think that's
going to be an effective tool to make
those make make the keep our society
safe alright so on guns somebody wants
to wants to cast a vote based on your
differences in by states of new handgun
purchases what is that what's that mean
a photo license id like a like a
driver's license for new handguns and
and you know there were the lawsuits you
would have to get the license a photo id
to go in and before you could buy the
gun correct all right state the state i
think states should should do that for
new handguns because too many criminals
are getting guns there was a recent
investigation of the
of the number in texas who got who were
given concealed weapons permits in spite
of the fact that they had records and
the los angeles times has spent a lot of
ink going into that but i am not for
doing anything that would affect hunters
or sportsmen rifles shotguns existing
handguns i do think that that sensible
gun safety measures are warranted now
look if this is the year this is in the
aftermath of columbine and paducah and
all of the places around our country
where the nation has been shocked by
these these weapons in the hands of the
wrong people the woman who bought the
guns for the two boys who did that
killing at columbine said that if she
had had to to to give her name and fill
out a form there she would not have
bought those guns that conceivably could
have prevented that tragedy back to the
question about the differences on gun
control what are they governor from your
point of view between you and the
vice-president well i'm not for i'm not
for photo licensing but let me say
something about columbine and because we
got gun laws he says we ought to have
gun-free school so everybody believes
that and i'm sure every state and the
union's got him can't carry a gun into a
school and there ought to be a
consequence when you do carry a gun into
a school but columbine spoke to a larger
issue it's it's it's really a matter of
culture it's the culture that somewhere
along the line we've begun to disrespect
life where child can walk in and can't
get had their heart turned dark as a
result of being on the internet and walk
in as how to take somebody else's life
so gun laws are important no question
about it but so loving children and you
know character education classes and
faith-based programs being a part of
after-school programs
somebody some desperate child it needs
to have somebody put their arm around
say we love you and so there's a
this is a society that of ours that was
got to do a better job of teaching
children right from wrong and we can
enforce law but there seems to be a lot
of preoccupation on unnecessarily in
this debate but just in general in law
but there's a larger law love your
neighbor like you'd like to be loved
yourself and that's where our society
must head if we're gonna be a peaceful
and happy and prosperous society i also
believe in the golden rule and i agree
with a lot of the other things that the
governor has said we do have a serious
problem in our culture tipper and i have
worked on the problem of violence and
entertainment aimed aimed at children
she's worked on it longer than i have
but i feel very strongly about that and
if if i'm elected president i will do
something about that but i think that we
i think we have to start with better
parenting but but i don't think that we
can ignore the role played by guns i
mean the fact is that there even though
no state wants them there are guns in
some schools and the reason it's so
difficult for schools to control that is
because in recent years there has been a
flood of cheap handguns that are so
widely available that kids are finding
ways to get a hold of them and i think
that if you look at the situation as it
exists here in the united states
compared to any other country in the
world it seems to be pretty obvious that
while we respect the rights of hunters
and sportsmen we do need some
common-sense gun-safety steps to stem
this flood of guns that are getting into
the wrong hands no question about that
but there's also needs to be strong and
forcement of the law some kid who feels
like they kit doesn't matter where the
gun comes from it could be a cheap gun
expensive gun
what matters is something in this
person's head says there's not going to
be a consequence so in my state we
toughened up to juvenile justice laws we
added beds we're we're tough if we
believe in tough love we say if you get
caught carrying a gun
you automatically detained and that's
what needs to happen now we've got laws
if laws need to be strengthened like
instant background checks that's that's
important no question new question
both of you governor both of you have
talked much about medicare and health
care for seniors what about the more
than 40 million younger americans who do
not have health insurance right now what
would you do about that well i've got a
plan to do something about that it's to
make health care affordable and
available this way first there's some
who should be buying health care who
choose not to there's some hello.mat the
40 million some of the healthy folks are
healthy young kiss they'll never get
sick they're for it i'm not gonna have
don't eat health care right now and for
those what i think we need to do is to
develop an investment type vehicle that
would be an incentive for for them to
invest like medical savings accounts
with rollover cam capacity and in other
words you say to a youngster
it'll be in your financial interest to
start saving for future illness but for
the working folks that do want to have
health care that can't afford it a
couple of things we need to do when we
need more community health centers i've
developed put out money and my budget to
to expand community health centers all
around the country these are places
where people can get primary care
secondly and there and they're good
they're very important parts of the the
the safety net of health care secondly
that you get a 2,000 dollar rebate from
the government if you're a family 30,000
dollars or less it scales now as it gets
higher that you can use to purchase
health care in the private markets it'll
be a huge down payment for a pretty darn
good system if you allow also allow
convinced states to allow allow states
to allow the mother to match some of the
children's health insurance money with
it to pool purchasing power and to make
health care more affordable allow
business associations like the national
federation of independent business or
the chamber of commerce or the national
restaurant association to write
association plans across jurisdictional
lines so that small businesses have got
the capacity of national pooling to
drive the cost of insurance down i think
that's the very best way to go it
empowers people that trust people it
makes a it and it's a practical way to
and encourage people to purchase health
care insurance vice president gore it's
one of my top priorities jim to give
every single child in the united states
affordable health care within the next
four years i'd like to see eventually in
this country some form of the universal
health care but i'm not for a
government-run system in fact i'm for
shrinking the size of government
i want a smaller and smarter government
i have been in charge of this
reinventing government streamlining
project that's reduced the size of
government by more than 300,000 people
in the last several years and the budget
plan that i put out according to the los
angeles times again the way these things
are typically measured as a percentage
of the gdp will bring government
spending down to the lowest level in 50
years so i want to proceed carefully to
cover more people but i think that we
should start by greatly expanding the
so-called child health insurance or chip
program to to give health insurance to
every single child in this country i
think it's intolerable that we have so
many millions of children without any
health insurance so it's one of my top
priorities now i know that we have some
disagreements on this and i'm sorry to
tell you that there you know there is a
record here and texas ranks 49th out of
the 50 states in health care within
children with health care 49th for women
with health care and 50th for families
with health care so it is a priority for
me i guarantee you i'm not aware of any
program well i just i'll just leave it
at that i think it ought to be a top
priority governor did the vice president
or the vice president's figures correct
about texas well first of all let me say
he's not for a government-run health
care system i thought that's exactly
what he and mrs clinton and then fought
for in 1993 was a government-run health
care system that was fortunately stopped
in his tracks
secondly we spend 4.7 billion dollars a
year on the uninsured in the state of
texas our rate of uninsured that the
percentage of uninsured in texas has
gone down while the percentage of
uninsured in america has gone up our
chips program got a late start because
our government meets only four months
out of every two years
mr vice president may come for a shot
for somebody's been in washington for so
long but actually limited government can
work in the second largest state the
union and therefore congress passes the
bill after our session in 1970 97 ended
with passed the enabling legislation in
99 we've signed up over 110,000 children
to the chips program for comparable
states our size we're signing them up
fast as any other state and i you quote
all the numbers you want but i'm telling
you we care about our people in texas we
spend a lot of money to make sure people
get health care in the state of texas
and we're doing a better job than they
are at the national level for reducing
uninsured see right well i don't know
about the the all these percentages that
he throws out but i do know that the i
speculate that the reason why he didn't
answer your question directly as to
whether my numbers were right the facts
were right about texas ranking dead last
in families with health insurance and
49th out of 50 for both children and
women it is because those facts are
correct and as for why it happened i'm
no expert on the texas procedures but
what my friends there tell me is that
the governor imposed a measure put
forward by democrats in the legislature
to expand the number of children that
would be covered and instead directed
the money toward a tax cut a significant
part of which went to wealthy interests
he declared the need for a new tax cut
for the oil companies in texas an
emergency need and so the money was
taken away from the chip program and
there's a you don't have to take my word
for this there is now a federal judge's
opinion about the current
of this program or during the state of
texas to do so and you should breed that
judge's language about this there one
point i believe they're 1.4 million
children in texas who do not have health
insurance 600,000 of whom and maybe some
of those have since gotten it but as of
a year ago 600,000 of them were actually
eligible for it but they they couldn't
sign up for it because of the barriers
that they had to let the government
respond to that
those numbers correct does this is are
his charges correct if he's trying to
allege that i'm a hard-hearted person
and i don't care about children
he's absolutely wrong we spent 4.7
billion dollars a year in the state of
texas for uninsured people and they get
health care now there's not the most
efficient way to get people health care
but i want to remind you the number of
uninsured in america during their watch
has increased and hqc wants but the
facts are that we're reducing the number
of uninsured as percentage of our
population and as a percentage of the
population is increasing nationally but
somehow the allegation that we don't
care and we're gonna give money for this
interest of that interest and not for
children in the state of texas this is
totally absurd and let me just tell you
who the jury is the people of texas
there's only been one governor ever
elected to back-to-back four-year terms
and that was me and i was able to do so
with a lot of democrat votes nearly 50
percent hispanic vote about 27 percent
of the african-american vote because
people know that i'm a conservative
person and a compassionate person so we
can throw all the kinds of numbers
around i'm just telling you our state
comes together to do what's right we
come together both republicans and
democrats let me put that directed to to
you vice president gore the reason you
brought this up is is that are you
suggesting that those numbers in that
record will reflect the way a governor
bush will operate in this area of health
insurance as president yes yes but but
it's not a statement about his heart i
don't claim to know his heart i think i
think he's a good person
i make no allegations about that
i believe him when he says that that he
has a good heart i know enough about
your story to to admire a lot of the
things that you have done as a person
but i think it's about his priorities
and let me tell you exactly why i think
that the choice he made to give a tax
cut for the oil companies and others
before addressing this i mean if if you
were the governor of a state that was
dead last in in health care for families
and all of a sudden you found yourself
with the biggest surplus your state had
ever had in its history wouldn't you
want to maybe use some of it to climb
from 50th to say 45 or 40 or something
or maybe better i would now but here's
why it's directly relevant jim because
by his own budget numbers his proposals
for spending on tax cuts for the
wealthiest of the wealthy are more than
the new spending proposals that he has
made for health care and education and
national defense all combined according
to his own numbers so it's not a
question of his heart it's as far as i
know it's a it's a question of
priorities and value see you know i mean
i mean first of all that's simply not
true what he just said of course and
secondly i repeat what is not true
governor that we spent the top one
percent received to 23 as opposed to 445
billion in new spending the top one
let's talk about my tax plan the top one
percent pay will pay one-third of all
the federal income taxes and in return
get one fifth of the bennis because but
benefits because most of the tax
reductions go to the people at the
bottom end of the economic ladder that
stands in stark contrast by the way to a
man who's going to leave 50 million 50
million americans out of tax relief we
just have a different point of view it's
a totally different point of view
he believes only the right people ought
to get tax relief i believe everybody
who pays taxes ought to get tax relief
let me go back to texas for example for
for a minute we paid four point seven be
an emphasis how do you how much i sign a
bill that puts chips in place the bill
finally came out at the end of the 99th
session were work
hard to sign up children we're doing it
faster than any other than any other
state our size comparable state we're
making really good progress and our
state cares a lot about our children my
priority is going to be the health of
our citizens these folks have had eight
years to get something done in
washington dc on the honest year they
have not done it they've had eight years
to get something done on medicare and
they have not got it done in my case to
the american people is if you're happy
with inactivity stay with the horse the
horse it's up there now but if you want
change you need to get somebody knows
how to bring republicans and democrats
together to get positive things done for
america no question new subject vice
president gore on the environment in
your 1992 book you said quote we must
make the rescue of our environment the
central organizing principle for
civilization and there must be a
wrenching transformation to save the
planet you still feel that way i do i
think that in this 21st century we will
soon see the consequences of what's
called global warming there was a study
just a few weeks ago suggesting that in
summertime the north polar ice cap would
be completely gone in 50 years already
many people see the strange weather
conditions that the old-timers say
they've never seen before in their
lifetimes and what's happening is the
the level of pollution is increasing
significantly now here's the good news
jim if we take the leadership role and
build the new technologies like the new
kinds of cars and trucks that detroit is
itchin to to build then we can create
millions of good new jobs by being first
into the market with these new kinds of
cars and trucks and other kinds of
technologies you know the japanese are
breathing down our necks on this they're
moving very rapidly because they know
that it is a fast growing world market
in some of these other countries
particularly in the developing world
their pollution is much worse than than
anywhere else and their people won't
standards of living and so they're
looking for ways to satisfy their desire
for for a better life and still reduce
reduced pollution at the same time i
think that holding on to the old ways
and the old argument that the
environment and the economy are in
conflict is is really outdated we have
to be bold we have to provide leadership
now it's true that we disagree on this
governor said that he doesn't think this
problem has necessarily caused by people
he's for letting the oil companies into
the arctic national wildlife refuge
houston's just become the the smokiest
city in the country and texas is number
one in industrial pollution we have a
very different outlook and i'll tell you
this i will fight for a clean
environment in ways that strengthen our
economy governor well let me start with
texas we are a big industrial state we
we're reduced our industrial waste by
eleven percent we cleaned up more
brownfields and any other administration
in my state's history 450 of them our
water is cleaner now elena what a
brownfield is the brownfield abandoned
industrial site that just his idle in
some of our urban centers and people are
willing to invest capital in the
brownfields don't want to do so for fear
a lawsuit i think we ought to have
federal liability protection depending
upon whether or not standards have been
met book you mentioned that vice
president gore wrote he also called for
taxing big big energy taxes in order to
clean up the environment and now that
the energy prices are high i guess he's
not advocating those big energy taxes
right now i believe we ought to fully
fund the land and water conservation
fund and with half the money going to
states the states can make the right
decisions for environmental quality i
think we need to have clean coal
technologies i propose two billion
dollars worth by the way i just found
out the other day an interesting fact
that there's a there's a national
petroleum reserve right next to food
in prudhoe bay that that your
administration opened up for exploration
in that pristine area and that was a
smart move because there's gas reserves
up there we need gas pipelines to bring
the gas down gasses is a clean fuel that
we can burn to we need to make sure that
if we deep control our plants that
there's mandatory that the plants must
conform to clean air standards the
grandfather plants that so we did in
texas no excuses i mean you must conform
know those are practical things we can
do but it starts with working a
collaborative effort with the states and
local folks you know if you own the land
every day's earth day and people care a
lot about their land and care about
their environment not all all wisdom is
in washington dc on this issue where do
you see the basic difference in very
simple terms and two or three sentences
between you and the governor on on the
environment but the loader wants to make
a choice what is it i'm really strongly
committed to to clean water and clean
air and cleaning up the the new kinds of
challenges like global warming
i write that i'm not in favor of energy
taxes i am in favor of tax cuts to
encourage and give incentives for the
quicker development of these new new
kinds of technologies and and let me say
again detroit is is raring to go on on
that we differ on the arctic national
wildlife refuge as i have said we differ
on whether or not pollution controls
ought to be voluntary i don't think you
can i don't think you can get results
that way we differ on the kinds of
appointments that that we would make
could you say it's a fundamental
difference i think it's a fundamental
difference and let me give you an
example he hold on what we talked about
so i just want to know for somebody
because we're running we're getting
close to end at the end of our time here
i just want somebody want to make wanted
to vote on in the environment how would
you draw the differences governor well
iii don't believe in command and control
out of washington dc i believe
washington a set standards but i don't i
think we ought to be cool
we've at the local levels and i think we
ought to work with people to local
levels and and i by the way i just want
to make sure we i can't let him just say
something not corrected the deccan
electric d control bill that i fought
for ensign in texas has mandatory
emission standards mr vice president
and that's what we ought to do at the
federal level when it comes to
grandfather plants for utilities do you
there's a i think there's a difference i
think i think for example take them when
they took 40 million acres of land out
of circulation without consulting local
officials i thought that was that's out
there out in the west not no west and
some on the logging issue i didn't right
it's not the way i would have done it
perhaps some of that land needs to be
set aside but i certainly would have
consulted with governor's and elected
officials before i would have acted
unilaterally what would you believe the
federal government still has some new
rules and new regulations and new laws
to pass in the environmental area or you
think you're absolutely still on there
based upon science and they're
reasonable so long as people have input
what about global warming i think it's
an issue that we need to take very
seriously but i don't think we know the
solution to global warming yet and i
don't think we've got all the facts
before we make decisions i'll tell you
one thing i'm not going to do is i'm not
gonna let the united states carry the
burden for cleaning up the world's air
like the kyoto treaty would have done
china and india were exempted from that
treaty i think we need to be more
even-handed as evidently 99 senators i
think with 99 senators support of that
position global global warming the
senate did turn it down yeah well that
vote wasn't exactly so rose a lot of
supporters of the kyoto treaty actually
ended up voting for that because the way
it was worded but there's no doubt
there's a lot of opposition to it in the
senate i'm not for command and control
techniques either i'm for working with
the the groups not just with industry
but also with the citizens groups and
local communities to control sprawl in
ways that the local communities
themselves come up with but i disagree
that we don't know the the cause of
global warm
i think that we do it's pollution carbon
dioxide and other chemicals that are
even more potent but in smaller
quantities that cause this look the
world's temperature is going up weather
patterns are changing storms are getting
more violent and unpredictable and what
are we going to tell our children and
i'm a grandfather now i want to be able
to tell my grandson when i'm in in my
later years that i didn't turn away from
from the evidence that showed that we
were we were doing some serious harm in
in my in my faith tradition it is it's
written in the book of matthew where
where your heart is there is your
treasure also and i believe that that we
ought to recognize the value to our
children and grandchildren of taking
steps that preserve the environment in a
way that's good for them yeah i agree i
just i i think there's been some some of
the scientists i believe mr vice
president have they've been changing
their opinion a little bit on global
warming a profound scientist recently
made a made it different they're both of
you now excuse me both of you have now
violated your own rules
hold that thought i've been trying so
hard not to i know i know but about
you're not under y'all's rules you are
not allowed to ask each other a question
i'll let you do it a moment ago all
right now you just twice sorry okay
that's an interrupted okay but anyhow
you just did it so now we're not sorry
but that's alright it's okay i apologize
mr vice president
but you don't allowed to do that either
i'm sorry go ahead finish your thought i
pay or care about these things i've
found course they care about oh you mean
the rule right
go ahead's what the heck yeah i of
course there's a lot of look global
warming needs to be taken very seriously
and i take it seriously but science
there's a lot of differing opinions and
before we react i think it's best to
have the full accounting full
understanding of what's taking place and
i think to answer your question i think
both of us care a lot about the
environment we may have different
approaches we may have different
approaches in terms of how we deal with
local folks and i decided an example of
the fact of the administration just
unilaterally acting without any input
and i remember you gave a very good
answer in new hampshire about the white
mountains about how it's important to
keep that collaborative effort in place
i feel very strongly the same place is
certainly one the attitude that took
place out west however new question yes
last question for you governor this
flows out some flows somewhat out of the
boston debate you you're right mate your
campaign officials of charge that vice
president gore exaggerates embellishes
and stretches the facts etc are you are
you do you believe these are serious
issues this is a serious issue that the
voters should use in deciding which one
of you two men to vote for on november 7
well we all make mistakes i've been
known to mangle a syllable or to myself
you know
but you know what i mean
i think credibility is important it's
gonna be important to be the food for
the president to be credible with
congress it's important for the
president to be credible with foreign
nations and yes i think it's something
that people need to consider this is
this isn't something new i read a report
or a memo from somebody in his 1988
campaign i forgot the fellows name
warning then-senator gore to be careful
about exaggerating claims and i thought
when during his debate with senator
bradley to saying he authored the eitc
when it didn't happen he mentioned the
last of the itc earned income tax credit
and i'm sorry that's right a lot of
initials for guys not from washington
and it anyway i met he'd be co-sponsored
and yet he didn't and so i think this is
an issue i think i found it to be an
issue in trying to defend my tax relief
package i thought there were some
exaggerations about the numbers but the
people gonna have to make up their mind
on this issue and i i'm going to
continue to defend my record and
defended my propositions against what i
think are exaggerations exaggerations
like for example only 5 of seniors
receive benefits under my medicare
reform package that's what he said the
other day that's simply not the case
i have every right in the world to
defend my record and my positions
that's what debates are about and that's
what campaigns are about vice president
gore i got some of the details wrong
last week and some of the examples that
i used jim and i'm sorry about that
and i'm gonna try to do better one of
the reasons i regret it is that it
getting a detail wrong interfered
several times with the point that i was
trying to make however many days that
young girl in florida
stood in her classroom however long even
if it was only one day doesn't change
the fact that there are a lot of
overcrowded classrooms and america and
we need to do something about that there
are seniors who pay more for the
prescriptions than a lot of other people
more than their bets sometimes more
sometimes than people in in foreign
countries and we need to do something
about that
not with a measure that leaves the
majority of them without any real basic
health until the next president's term
of four years is is is over but right
away and that means doing it under the
medicare program i can't promise that i
will never get another detail wrong i
can promise you that i will try not to
and hard but i will promise you this
with all the competence in in my heart
and in the world that i will do my best
if i'm elected president i'll work my
heart out to get the big things right
for the american people
does that resolve the issue of
government that's gonna be up to the
people in it i was a resolve it for you
i mean so it depends on what he says in
the future in the campaign but over here
folks are are saying some awful things
and and you hope they're not awful
things own words no no i mean i mean
what i mean is they you calling him a
serial exaggerator
i don't believe i've used those words no
but your campaign has maybe they have
your campaign officials there and your
campaign officials mr vice president
are now calling it's now calling the
governor a bumbler and wait a minute
i meanit's know what my point is should
this is this i don't i don't use
language like that and i don't think
that that we should it something like
this in your coma i understand the
commercial and your your i think i think
that what i i think the point of that is
that anybody would have a hard time
trying to make a tax cut plan that's so
large that would put us into such big
deficits that gives almost half the
benefits to the wealthiest of the
wealthy i think anybody would have a
hard time explaining that clearly in a
way that makes sense to to the average
person that's the kind of exaggeration i
was just talking about well i wasn't the
one having trouble explaining gentlemen
it's time to go to the closing
statements and vice president gore you
have two minutes jim one of the issues
that i would like to close with and on
my statement is education because it's
an example of the overall approach that
i think is is important this race is
about values it's about change it's
about giving choices to the american
people and education is my number one
priority because i think that it's the
most important big major change that we
can bring in our country i agree with
governor bush that we should have new
accountability testing of students i
think that we should require states to
test all students test schools and
school districts and i think that we
should go further and require teacher
testing for new teachers also the
difference is that while my plan starts
with new accountability and maintains
local control it doesn't stop there
because i want to give new choices to
parents to send their kids to college
with a ten thousand dollar tax deduction
for college tuition per child per year i
want to reduce the size of the
classrooms in this country for one basic
reason so that's
students can get more one-on-one time
with teachers and the way to do that is
first to recruit more teachers of a plan
and my budget to recruit a hundred
thousand new highly qualified teachers
and to help local school districts build
new schools i think that we have to put
more emphasis on early learning and a
preschool now here is how that connects
with all the rest of what we've been
talking about if you have if you
squander the surplus on a huge tax cut
that goes mostly to those at the top
then you can't make education the top
priority if the tax cut is your number
one two three and four priority you
can't do education you can't do both you
have to choose i choose education and
health care
the environment and retirement security
and i ask for your support governor bush
two minutes jim thank you very much
president thank you very much and i'd
like to thank the folks here at wake
forest i want to thank you all for
listening i'm running to get some things
done for america there's too many issues
left unresolved there's been too much
finger-pointing and too much
name-calling in washington dc
i'd like to unite this country to get an
agenda done that will speak to the hopes
and aspirations of the future i want to
have an education system that sets high
standards local control of schools and
strong accountability no child should be
left behind in america i want to make
sure we rebuild our military to keep the
peace i worry about morale in today's
military the warning signs are clear
it's time to have a new commander in
chief who will rebuild the military
payer win and women more and make sure
they're housed better and have a focused
mission for our military once and for
all i want to do something about
medicare issues been too long on the
table because it's been a political
issue it's time to bring folks together
to say that all seniors get prescription
drug coverage
i wanted something about social security
it's an important priority because now
is the time to act and we're gonna say
to our seniors of our promises we've
made to you be promises kept
but younger workers in order to make
sure the system exists tomorrow younger
workers ought to be able to take some of
your own money
and invest it in safe securities to get
a better rate of return on that money
and finally i do believe in tax relief i
believe we can set our priorities i
don't believe like the vice president
doesn't infuse government i believe in
limited government and by having a
limited government and a focused
government we can send some of the money
back to the people that pay the bills
i want to have a tax relief for all
people who pay the bills in america
because i think you can spend your money
more wisely than the federal government
thank you for listening i'm asking for
your vote and god bless
and we will return next tuesday night
october 17th from washington university
in st louis but the third and final
debate thank you vice president gore
governor bush see you next week for now
from winston-salem i'm jim lehrer thank
you and good night good night